The President:
This week, we've made important progress towards the goal of
bringing about change
abroad and change at home.
During my visit to Russia, we
began the process of resetting
relations so that we can address
key national priorities like the
threat of nuclear
weapons and extremism.
At the G8 summit, leaders from
nearly 30 nations met to discuss
how we'll collectively confront the urgent challenges of our
time, from managing the global recession to fighting global
warming to addressing
global hunger and poverty.
And in Ghana, I laid out my
agenda for supporting democracy
and development in Africa
and around the world.
But even as we make progress
on these challenges abroad,
my thoughts are on the state
of our economy at home.
And that's what I want to
talk to you about today.
We came into office facing the
most severe economic downturn
since the Great Depression.
At the time, we were losing, on
average 700,000 jobs a month.
And many feared that our
financial system was on the
verge of collapse.
As a result of the swift and
aggressive action we took in the
first few months of this year,
we've been able to pull our
financial system and our
economy back from the brink.
We took steps to re-start
lending to families and
businesses, stabilize our
major financial institutions,
and help homeowners stay in
their homes and pay their mortgages.
We also passed the largest and
most sweeping economic recovery
plan in our nation's history.
The Recovery Act wasn't designed
to restore the economy to full
health on its own, but to
provide the boost necessary to
stop the free fall.
It was designed to spur demand
and get people spending again
and cushion those who had
borne the brunt of the crisis.
And it was designed to save
jobs and create new ones.
In a little over 100 days, this Recovery Act has worked as intended.
It's already extended unemployment insurance and
health insurance to those who
have lost their jobs in this recession.
It's delivered $43 billion in tax relief to American working
families and businesses.
Without the help the Recovery
Act has provided to struggling
states, its estimated that state
deficits would be nearly twice
as large as they are now,
resulting in tens of thousands
of additional layoffs --
layoffs that would affect police
officers, teachers,
and firefighters.
The Recovery Act's allowed small businesses and clean energy
companies to hire new workers
or scrap their plans for
eliminating current jobs.
And it's led to new
jobs building roads,
bridges and other
infrastructure projects,
thousands of which are
only beginning now.
In the months to come, thousands
more projects will begin,
leading to additional jobs.
Now, I realize that when we
passed this Recovery Act,
there were those who felt that
doing nothing was somehow an answer.
Today, some of those same
critics are already judging the
effort a failure although they
haven't yet offered a plausible alternative.
Others believed that the
recovery plan should have been
even larger, and they're already
calling for a second recovery plan.
But, as I made clear at
the time it was passed,
the Recovery Act was not
designed to work in four months
-- it was designed to
work over two years.
We also knew that it would take
some time for the money to get
out the door, because we're
committed to spending it in a
way that's effective
and transparent.
Crucially, this is a plan that
will also accelerate greatly
through the summer and the fall.
We must let it work the
way it's supposed to,
with the understanding
that in any recession,
unemployment tends to recover
more slowly than other measures
of economic activity.
Now, I'm confident that the United States of America will
weather this economic storm.
But once we clear
away the wreckage,
the real question is what
we will build in its place.
Even as we rescue this economy
from a full blown crisis,
I've insisted that we must
rebuild it better than before.
Without serious reforms, we're
destined to either see more
crises, or suffer stagnant
growth rates for the foreseeable
future, or a
combination of the two.
That's a future I
absolutely reject.
And that's why we're laying a
new foundation that's not only
strong enough to withstand the
challenges of the 21st century,
but one that will allow us to
thrive and compete in a global economy.
That means investing in
the jobs of the future,
training our workers to
compete for those jobs,
and controlling the health care
costs that are driving us into debt.
Through the clean energy
investment we've made in the
Recovery Act, we're already
seeing start-ups and small
businesses make plans to
create thousands of new jobs.
In California, 3,000 people will
be employed to build a new solar plant.
In Michigan, investments in wind
turbines and wind technology is
expected to create
over 2,600 jobs.
And a few weeks ago, the House
of Representatives passed
historic legislation that would
finally make clean energy the
profitable kind of energy,
leading to whole new industries
and jobs that can't
be outsourced.
To give our workers the skills
and education they need to
compete for the high-tech,
high-wage jobs of the future,
we're working on reforms that
will close achievement gaps,
ensure that our schools
meet high standards,
reward our teachers for
performance and give them new
pathways to advancement.
Finally, we've made important
progress in the last few weeks
on health care reform that
will control the costs that are
driving our families,
our businesses,
and our government into debt.
Both the Senate and the House
have now produced legislation
that will bring down costs,
provide better care for
patients, and curb the worst
practices of insurance
companies, so that they can no
longer deny Americans coverage
based on a pre-existing
medical condition.
It's a plan that would also
allow Americans to keep their
health insurance if they lose
their job or if they change their job.
And it would set up a health
insurance exchange --
a marketplace that will allow
families and small businesses to
access one-stop-shopping for
quality, affordable coverage,
and help them compare prices and
choose the plan that best suits their needs.
One such choice would be a
public option that would make
health care more affordable
through competition that keeps
the insurance companies honest.
One other point.
Part of what makes our
current economic situation so
challenging is that we already
had massive deficits as the
recession gathered force.
And although the Recovery Act
represents just a small fraction
of our long term debt, people
have legitimate questions as to
whether we can afford reform
without making our deficits much worse.
So let me be clear; I have been
firm in insisting that both
health care reform and clean
energy legislation cannot add to
our deficit.
And I intend to continue
the work of reducing waste,
eliminating programs
that don't work,
and reforming our entitlement
programs to ensure that our long
term deficits are
brought under control.
I said when I took office that
it would take many months to
move our economy from recession
to recovery and ultimately to prosperity.
We're not there yet, and I
continue to believe that even
one American out of
work is one too many.
But we're moving in
the right direction.
We're cleaning up the
wreckage of this storm.
And we are laying a firmer,
stronger foundation so that we
may better weather whatever
future storms may come.
This year has been and will
continue to be a year of
rescuing our economy
from disaster.
But just as important will be
the work of rebuilding a long
term engine for economic growth.
It won't be easy, and there will
continue to be those who argue
that we have to put off hard
decisions that we have already
deferred for far too long.
But earlier generations of
Americans didn't build this
great country by fearing the
future and shrinking our dreams.
This generation --
our generation --
has to show that same
courage and determination.
I believe we will.
Thanks for listening.